# Unit 3: Natural Resource Base of Ethiopia

## INTRODUCTION

As it is indicated in the unit title, now you are going to deal with the natural resource base of Ethiopia that is concerned on those major natural resources such as soils, water, natural vegetation, and wildlife that are foundation of any economic development, food security and other basic necessities for the Ethiopian.

## Unit Outcomes

After completing this unit, you will be able to:

✅ Recognize the concept of natural resources;
✅ Elaborate on the major drainage systems of Ethiopia;
✅ Explain the distribution of the major water resources in Ethiopia;
✅ State soils types and distribution in Ethiopia;
✅ Explain factors responsible for difference in types of natural vegetation in Ethiopia;
✅ Describe the types of wildlife in Ethiopia and factors that affect their distribution; and
✅ Describe the spatial distribution and variation of minerals in Ethiopia.

## Main Contents

3.1 Meaning of Natural Resources
3.2 Drainage Systems of Ethiopia
3.3 Water Resources of Ethiopia
3.4 Major Soils Types of Ethiopia
3.5 Major Mineral Resources and their Distribution in Ethiopia
3.6 Biotic Resources of Ethiopia

🌐 Unit Summary

🌐 Review Exercises

---

## 3.1 MEANING OF NATURAL RESOURCES

At the end of this section, you will be able to:

✅ Recognize the concept natural resources; and
✅ Describe the classification of natural resources.

### KEY TERMS

🔑 Non-renewable resources
🔑 Renewable resources

Natural resources are natural assets occurring in nature that can be used for economic production or consumption. They are classified into renewable resources and nonrenewable resources. Plants, animals, soil, water, geothermal energy, wind energy, solar radiation are categorized under renewable resources while all minerals, coal, crude oil and natural gas under non-renewable resources.

Renewable resources are resources which can be replenished by nature while nonrenewable resources are resources that cannot be regenerated by nature and exist in limited amount.

In Ethiopia, these resources are under the influence of various interconnected factors like population pressure, agricultural expansion, migration, rapid urbanization, resettlement, climate change, and environmental pollution. The huge population of Ethiopia had been putting a great burden on the sustainability of almost all types of natural resources. There is, therefore, serious degradation of land, water, forest, rangeland, and wildlife resources that appear to feed off each other.

### Activity 3.1

Answer the following questions:

1. What does sustainable utilization of natural resources mean?
2. Ethiopia's natural resources have been deteriorating from time to time. Why?

---

## 3.2 DRAINAGE SYSTEMS OF ETHIOPIA

What natural factor influences the drainage systems of Ethiopia? Where do most rivers of Ethiopia end?

At the end of this section, you will be able to:
✅ Elaborate major drainage systems of Ethiopia.

Drainage systems refer to the flow direction and destination of the rivers. The drainage patterns and systems of Ethiopia are the results of various structural events that took place in the Cenozoic era.

The drainage systems of Ethiopia are basically classified into three major groups:

i. The Western (Mediterranean) sea drainage system
ii. The Southeastern (Indian Ocean) drainage system
iii. The Inland (Rift Valley) drainage system

**Figure 3.1: The Drainage Systems of Ethiopia –**

The image is a map of Ethiopia showing three major drainage systems in different colors. The map identifies key rivers: Tekezze, Abbay, Baro-Akobo, Omo-Ghibe, Awash, Wabishebelle, and Genalle. Three drainage systems are labeled: I. The Mediterranean Sea Drainage system, II. The Rift valley Drainage system, III. The Indian Ocean Drainage system.

### i. The Western (Mediterranean Sea) Drainage System

The western drainage system is the largest of the three systems both in terms of catchment area and volume of water. It contributes 60% of the country's total annual water discharge. It is made up of major rivers and their tributaries namely:

Þ River Tekezze – This river drains the Massif of western Lasta, northern Gondar/Semein and southwestern, western and central Tigray.
Þ River Abbay – This one has its origin in the Gojjam plateau. A large number of streams join the river from the plateaus of western Shewa, southwestern Wollo, northern Wollega, and northern Illubabor. It has a semicircular course from Lake Tana, separating southeastern Gondar from Gojjam and separating Gojjam from Shewa.
Þ River Baro-Akobo – This water course drains the wettest highlands of the southwest and crosses the border to join the Nile.

These rivers joining the Nile in the Sudan and finally end up in the Mediterranean Sea.

### ii. The Southeastern (Indian Ocean) Drainage System

This system is the second largest drainage system. It consists of the Genalle and Wabe Shebelle. These rivers collect waters from the highlands of Hararghe, Sidamo, Bale and Arsi. This drainage system flows southeast, across the Somali arid and semi-arid areas. It contributes about 32% of the country's total annual water discharge.

The Wabe Shebelle, the longest river in the country, does not reach the Indian Ocean. It ends at the Benadir coast of Somalia. The Genale, on the other hand, reaches the Indian Ocean. It joins the Dawa River at the Ethio-Somalia border, where it acquires the name Juba River.

### iii. The Inland (Rift Valley) Drainage System

This system is the smallest of the three systems in terms of catchment area, discharge of water and volume of water. There are a number of lakes and smaller streams, like the Bilate and Gedabo, which flow into Lake Abbaya; the Segan, which flows into Chew Bahir; and the Meki and the Katar, which flow into Lake Ziway. The major rivers in this drainage system are the Awash and the Omo-Ghibe.

The Awash River basin is the most utilized in the Rift Valley. The basin covers a total area of 110,000 km². It rises from the Shewan plateau near Ginchi town, a town at about 100 kilometers west of Addis Ababa, and flows along the Rift Valley. It terminates in the salty lake of Abbe on the border with Djibouti. The middle and lower courses are part of the Great Rift Valley system (the upper course is not part of the system). The lower Awash River basin comprises the deltaic alluvial plains of the Tendaho, Assaita, and Dit Behri areas, and of the terminal lakes.

### Activity

Answer the following questions:

1. To which direction do rivers in your locality flow? What determines their direction of flow?
2. Draw a map of Ethiopia and divide it into the three drainage systems.

---

## 3.3 WATER RESOURCES OF ETHIOPIA

At the end of this section, you will be able to:

✅ Explain the distribution of the major water resources in Ethiopia.

As you know, Ethiopia has been known as the "Water Tower of Northeastern Africa" for the last fifty to sixty years. Ethiopia is the second richest African country in terms of water resource potential, following the Democratic Republic of Congo. Generally, Ethiopia has adequate average annual rainfall in most areas. As a result, it has several major rivers, lakes, and significant ground water resources.

### 3.3.1 Major Rivers of Ethiopia and Their Characteristics

Do you know the major rivers of Ethiopia?

Ethiopia is among the few countries that have many rivers. Ethiopia has enormous potential water resources. As well as being numerous, Ethiopian rivers are energetic. They flow from the highlands of the interior to the peripheral lowlands and then to seas and lakes bouncingly. These conditions have made Ethiopia known as the "water tower of Northeastern Africa" and as the watershed between the Mediterranean Sea and the Indian Ocean drainage basins.

**Table 3.1: Major Rivers of Ethiopia and Their Tributaries**

| Rivers | Catchment Area (km²) | Length in kms | | Total | Major Tributaries |
| | | Inside | Outside | | |
| Wabe Shebelle | 205,407 | 1340 | 660 | 2000 | Ramis, Erer, Dakata, Fafen, Yerer, Gobelle, Galleti, ojo |
| Abbay | 198,508 | 800 | 560 | 1360 | Dabus, Didessa, Fincha, Gu-der, Muger, Jemma, Beshillo, Shinta, Dinder |
| Genale | 168,141 | 480 | 570 | 1050 | Dawa, Weyb, Welmel, ena |
| Awash | 113,709 | 1200 | - | 1200 | Akaki, Kessem, Borkena, Mille |
| Tekkezze | 87,733 | 608 | 560 | 1,168 | Tirari, Anghereb, Ghiba, Guang |
| Gibe/Omo | 77,205 | 760 | | 760 | Gojeb, Gilgel Gibe |
| Baro | 75,718 | 227 | 280 | 507 | Akobo, Gilo |

### 3.3.2 Characteristics of Ethiopian Rivers

Are all Ethiopian rivers perennial and non-fluctuating in their volume of water?

The most important characteristics of Ethiopian rivers include:

Þ Seasonal fluctuation in water volume;
Þ Steep profiles; they arise from very high places and flow to the country's borders across lowlands;
Þ Rapids and waterfalls along their courses;
Þ Running through steep-sided river valleys and gorges; and
Þ Serve as boundaries, both international and regional.

### Activity

Answer the following:

1. By referring to table 3.1, identify:
   a) The longest river in Ethiopia;
   b) River with the largest catchment area in Ethiopia;
   c) Rivers forming an inland drainage system;
   d) River with many tributaries compared to others.

### Focus

Some of the Ethiopian rivers are given new names after they cross the country's borders. Examples:

Þ River Abbay becomes Blue Nile in the Sudan.
Þ River Tekezze becomes River Athbara in the Sudan.
Þ River Genale becomes River Juba in Somalia.
Þ River Baro becomes River Sobat in the Sudan.

### 3.3.3 Lakes of Ethiopia

Can you tell the deepest and shallowest lakes of Ethiopia?

By African standard, Ethiopia is a country rich in lakes. They are found dispersed on the plateaus and clustered in the Rift Valley.

Most of the lakes are the result of structures that occurred during the Quaternary Period; i.e., they are not outcomes of climate. This fact is proved by the location of these lakes in the drier parts of the country. The natural lakes found in Ethiopia can be classified into highland and Rift Valley lakes.

**Highland Lakes:** These lakes are situated on the plateaus, either as crater or watershed lakes. These types of lakes resulted from different types of structural activities.

A crater lake is formed after an explosive volcano breaks a mountain open, leaving a deep mouth. The mouth is filled with water – from either small streams or subterranean sources. The highland crater lakes in Ethiopia are Haik near Dessie and Hashenge near Korum. There are also crater lakes in different parts of Ethiopia. They include many small but deeper lakes in and around Bishoftu, e.g. Bishoftu, Kuriftu, Babbo Gaya, and Arsedi. Wonchi and Dendi around Ambo, Ginchi and Wellisso and Ziquala are the other crater lakes.

A watershed lake is formed when a sheet of lava dams up a shallow surface depression. For example, Lake Tana was formed during the Quaternary Period, when a sheet of flowing lava dammed the shallow depression that had already been formed between the Gojjam and Gondar plateaus.

**Rift Valley Lakes:** Unlike the highland lakes, the Rift Valley lakes are clustered. The Rift Valley lakes are formed in the depressions and basins caused by tectonic activities. They are found in a linear pattern along the floor of the Rift Valley.

**Figure 3.2: Major Rift Valley Lakes of Ethiopia –**

The image is a map showing the linear arrangement of Rift Valley lakes in Ethiopia. Key lakes labeled include: 1. Lake Abbe, 2. Lake Ziway, 3. Lake Abijata, 4. Lake Langano, 5. Lake Shalla, 6. Lake Hawassa, 7. Lake Abaya, 8. Lake Chamo, 9. Lake Chew Bahir.

**Table 3.2: Depth, Area and Location of Ethiopian Lakes**

| Lakes | Area (km²) | Maximum depth (meters) | Type |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Tana | 3,600 | 9 | Highland |
| Abbaya | 1,160 | 13 | Rift Valley |
| Chamo | 551 | 10 | Rift Valley |
| Ziway/Danbal | 434 | 4 | Rift Valley |
| Shalla | 409 | 266 | Rift Valley |
| Langano | 230 | 46 | Rift Valley |
| Hawassa | 229 | 10 | Rift Valley |
| Abijatta | 205 | 14 | Rift Valley |
| Haik | 35 | 23 | Highland |
| Hashenge | 20 | 25 | Highland |

### Activity

Answer the following:

1. By referring to table 3.2, identify:
   a) The deepest lake;
   b) Shallowest lake;
   c) The largest lake.

### 3.3.4 Significance of Ethiopian Lakes and Rivers

Ethiopian rivers and lakes are very important natural resources for the development of socio-economic and aesthetical value in the country. Some of their general importances are given briefly below:

**I. Hydroelectric Power (H.E.P.) Generation:** Rivers are the main source of hydroelectric power (H.E.P.) supplies for the country. Examples:

Þ River Gibe – Gilgel Gibe 1, 2 and 3 H.E.P. plants,
Þ River Awash – Awash 1, 2 and 3 H.E.P. project,
Þ River Fincha – Fincha H.E.P. project,
Þ Tekezze – Tekezze H.E.P plant,
Þ Melka Wakena – Wabe Shebelle,
Þ Koysha - Under construction,
Þ Great Ethiopian Renaissance Dam H.E.P plant – under construction.

**II. Fishery:** Ethiopian rivers and lakes are also the country's main source of fish. Example: Lake Chamo, Lake Abbaya, Lake Tana, River Baro, etc.

**III. Major Irrigation Schemes:** They are again very important water sources for irrigation. River Awash is the most utilized in this regard; this is because of the flat plains it crosses for hundreds of kilometers.

**IV. Navigation:** The River Baro is the only river in Ethiopia used for water transport. Similarly, Lake Tana, Lake Ziway and Lake Abbaya are important inland water transport routes.

**V. Tourism and Recreation:** Ethiopia's lakes and rivers provide recreation resorts and aesthetic value. Their scenic beauty emanates from the rich variety of birds, fish and other wildlife, spectacularly deep gorges, waterfalls of all description and the mists they produce. These panoramic features win the affection of the Ethiopian people and tourists and they are sites of the country's best recreational resorts. The economic potential of these scenic resources is enormous but it is not well developed.

### Activity

Answer the following questions:

1. Ethiopia is known as the "Water Tower of East Africa". Explain.
2. Most rivers of Ethiopia are not suitable for navigation. Why?
3. Compare and contrast watershed lakes and crater lakes.
4. Make an educational trip to a nearby river or stream with your teacher and perform these tasks:
   a) Draw a sketch map of the stream or river area. Then, answer the following questions:
   b) Do the local people use the river for small scale irrigation purposes such as growing vegetables? If so, how?
   c) If not, why not? Present the case to your teacher and discuss.

---

## 3.4 MAJOR SOILS TYPES OF ETHIOPIA

At the end of this section, you will be able to:

✅ Distinguish major soil types in Ethiopia; and
✅ Explain the characteristics of major soils types in Ethiopia.

### KEY TERMS

🔑 Humus
🔑 Parent material
🔑 Soil
🔑 Conservation

### 3.4.1 Formation of Soils in Ethiopia

Soil is the loose material overlying the crust of the earth consisting mainly of very small particles. Its major components are water, air, organic and inorganic minerals. It is a dynamic, natural and complex substance which can support animals and plants.

Soils of Ethiopia are the result of:

Þ Parent rock material, which has been broken into small particles by way of weathering and natural decomposition
Þ Climatic conditions, which largely determine the speed and nature of the processes that form the soil; for example, extreme heat, or cold, could stop the work of bacteria, and the amount of moisture influences on several aspects of soil formation.
Þ Vegetation cover, which adds humus to the soils and renders support to the soil making animals and bacteria
Þ Topography, soils on the side of hills tend to be shallow, due to erosional losses.

On the plateaus that make up extensive areas in north, north western, south western, central and south eastern Ethiopia the parent rocks are volcanic origin and experience sufficient rainfall. The soils formed in these areas are red basaltic and black basaltic soils. Unlike the red basaltic soils, the black soils have high clay content that makes the soil difficult for farming.

In areas where the hard crystalline rocks are the parent rock, the soils are poor and thin. They are also rocky and acidic. They range in colour from grey to brown. They are found in Hararghe plateaus and Borena lowlands.

In the Afar region where recent volcanic deposits and dried-out lake deposits had occurred, very shallow and saline-dominated soils are formed. Due to time and climatic effects, these soils are not deep and fertile.

In the southeastern lowlands where the parent rocks are sedimentary rocks, the soils lack humus but they are rich in phosphorous and potash. They are also low in nitrogen content.

In the lower course of the major rivers, transported soils often known as alluvial soils are dominant. These soils are fertile because of their volcanic origin and continuous nourishment of minerals.

People depend on soils; conversely, the quality of the soils depends on how wisely people use the land. Not only in countries like Ethiopia, whose economy is largely agrarian, but also in highly industrialized countries, soil is one of the most important bases of development.

### 3.4.2 Types of Soil in Ethiopia

The soils of Ethiopia are basically derived from volcanic, metamorphic and sedimentary rocks. According to the latest classification made by the FAO, there are eighteen classes of soil in Ethiopia.

Can you mention names of soils you know in your locality or elsewhere?

Here are the main soil types. They cover more than 85 percent of the country:

**1. Nithosols (Red Basaltic Soils):** These soil types:

Þ Cover about 12 percent of the country.
Þ Are basically associated with high rainfall and are found in areas that were previously covered with forest.
Þ Are predominant in the Western Highlands of Wollega, Kafa, Illubabor, the Southern Highlands of Sidama, the Central and Western Highlands of Shewa, the Highlands of Gojjam and the Eastern Highlands of Hararghe.
Þ Are matured soils with deep profiles. They are highly leached and lack soluble minerals like Sodium, Calcium, etc., but they are rich in iron and aluminum.
Þ Are potentially good for farming and other agricultural practices since they are friable, and have a stable structure; as a result,
Þ Are the most widely cultivated soil type. They are the best soils for coffee, inset and cereals.

**2. Vertisols (Black Basaltic Soils):** Soil types of this sort:

Þ Cover about 10 percent of the total land of Ethiopia.
Þ Have high clay content; so, are sticky. For this reason and for poor drainage qualities, such soils are difficult to be used for farming purposes.
Þ Have excellent nutrients that could provide support for agriculture, but their poor drainage qualities limit their use for grazing purposes.
Þ Are largely found in Arsi, Bale and central Hararghe, where there are pronounced wet and dry seasons.

**3. Cambisoils:** Such soils:

Þ Are soils that developed from the recent lava deposits of the Quaternary Period.
Þ Are young and shallow.
Þ Are found on the rugged and sloping terrain of the Plateau of Shewa (eastern escarpment) and Chercher Highlands.

**4. Regosols:** These types:

Þ Like the cambisols, are shallow and young; but they are coarse-textured.
Þ Have low agricultural value.
Þ Are found in the Danakil and Ogaden lowlands.

**5. Xerosols:** These soils:

Þ Are generally young and shallow, and are found in arid and semi-arid regions. They have a weakly developed profile.
Þ Are found extensively in the Northeastern escarpment, Northwestern and Southeastern Lowlands.
Þ Are characterized by high salt content and humus deficiencies.
Þ Have little significance for agriculture except places where they could be irrigated.

**6. Luvisols:** These soils:

Þ Are well-developed in areas where there are clearly marked wet and dry seasons and when leaching is not very high.
Þ Are among the best soils, since they have good chemical nutrients.
Þ Are intensively cultivated, except in areas that are steeply sloped or waterlogged.
Þ Are found around Lake Tana, and in the eastern part of the Northern Central Highlands and in the Southern Lowlands.

**7. Lithosols:** Such soils:

Þ Are similar to cambisols and regosols in their poor maturity and their location on steep slopes.
Þ Are found in areas of low precipitation.
Þ Cover the escarpments of the Northeastern and Chercher Highlands.

**8. Fluvisols:** This type of soils:

Þ Are soils that rivers have transported from highlands to lowlands.
Þ Cover about 10 percent of the country's total area.
Þ Are associated with river, sea and lake deposits.
Þ Have very good agricultural potential.
Þ Are found extensively in the lower regions of the Omo, Awash, Abbay and Baro-Akobo Rivers.

### Activity

Answer the following questions:

1. List the soils of Ethiopia in the order of their suitability for agriculture from the best to the worst.
2. What is the basic difference between the Red Basaltic and the Black Basaltic soil?
3. Compare and contrast Cambisols and Fluvisols.

---

## 3.5 MAJOR MINERAL RESOURCES AND THEIR DISTRIBUTION IN ETHIOPIA

At the end of this section, you will be able to:

✅ Elaborate major mineral resources of Ethiopia; and
✅ Describe the spatial distribution minerals in Ethiopia.

### KEY TERMS

🔑 Gold
🔑 Metallic minerals
🔑 Non-metallic minerals
🔑 Petroleum
🔑 Platinum

According to some preliminary geological survey, there is an agreement that Ethiopia has many different types of untapped mineral deposition. None of them is currently extracted on a large scale either for commercial or industrial use.

In Ethiopia non-metallic minerals are more produced annually compared to the metallic ones. With the exception of common salt, almost all other productions of minerals are produced in small scale. Some amounts of these minerals are exported. Currently, a number of known occurrences and distribution of metallic and nonmetallic minerals have been identified as follows:

### I. Metallic Minerals

#### a) Gold

It has been extracted in Ethiopia since ancient times from alluvial deposits. There are two principal geological environments in Ethiopia in which gold is found. These include volcanic veins in Precambrian rocks and alluvial deposits. The largest active gold mines in Ethiopia are Adola, Bule Hora, Arero, Moyale, Akobo, Lega Dembi, Sakaro and the Tigray regions.

#### b) Platinum

It is the key input for manufacturing of many electronic equipment including mobile phones. The deposits are identified in the western parts of Ethiopia (north east Yubdo, north of Gimbi and in the Akobo area of Gambella region).

#### c) Tantalum

Like platinum it is used for manufacturing of many electronic equipment including mobile phones. Kenticha, a place 50kms South-east of Shakiso in Adola is identified as a tantalum rich area. In other areas of Adola, tantalum bearing minerals have been found but none of these areas has been explored in detail.

### II. Non-metallic Minerals

a) **Potash and Salt:** They are found in the Danakil depression (Dallol) area of the Northern Rift Valley. This area is known for its rich potash and salt deposits.

b) **Soda Ash:** Geological surveys indicated that some rift valley lakes of Ethiopia namely Abijata, Shalla, etc. contain 460 million metric tons of Sodium Carbonate. The concentration of salt, combined with a favorable climate, which makes this area potentially one of the best locations for soda ash production in the country.

c) **Limestone:** It is important mineral resource for building and construction. It is used for the production of cement and chalk. Good reserves are found in Tigray, Shewa and Harerghe.

d) **Clay:** Clay deposits are found in many parts of Ethiopia. It is used for pottery and brick industries.

e) **Silica:** It is an important raw material for glassy industries. Reserves of silica sand are found in Harer, Shewa, Gondar, Gojjam, Sidamo, Arsi, Tigray and Wollega.

f) **Crude Oil and Natural Gas:** Reserves of natural gas and crude oil are believed to be found in the Ogaden basin.

g) **Coal:** The lignite coal deposits are proved to exist in Shewa (Debre Brihan-Dessie road, Sululta and near Mojo), Sidama.

### Activity

Answer the following question:

1. In group, discuss the socio-economic significance of mineral resources in Ethiopia.

---

## 3.6 BIOTIC RESOURCES OF ETHIOPIA

At the end of this section, you will be able to:

✅ Describe the major types of natural vegetation in Ethiopia; and
✅ Explain variations in the distribution of wildlife in Ethiopia.

### KEY TERMS

🔑 Afroalpine
🔑 Biotic resource
🔑 Endemic animals
🔑 Game animals
🔑 Savanna woodlands
🔑 Xerophytes

What do you know about biotic resource?

Biotic resources are living organisms in an ecosystem. They are typically sorted into three main categories: 1) Producers (include all green plants); 2) Consumers (include all animals); and 3) Decomposers (include bacteria and fungi).

### 3.6.1 Major Types of Natural Vegetation of Ethiopia

Natural vegetation refers to any original plant grown in and covering an area. The distribution of natural vegetation is influenced by many factors. The most important ones are: Altitude, Climate, Soil type, and Drainage.

In Ethiopia, the types of the natural vegetation of an area are highly correlated with altitude and rainfall; they are also correlated with temperature. The lowlands have harsh environments due to low rainfall and are characterized by xerophytic plants, while the highlands are characterized by different types of tree stands and forests.

The natural vegetation of Ethiopia is classified into four major types based largely on the altitude and rainfall:

a) Afroalpine and sub-Afroalpine
b) Forests
c) Woodland savanna
d) Semi-desert and Desert Vegetation

**Figure 3.3: Distribution of the Major Natural Vegetation of Ethiopia –**

The image is a detailed vegetation map of Ethiopia showing different vegetation zones across the country. The legend identifies: Desert and Semi-desert Scrubland (DSS), Acacia-Commiphora woodland and bushland proper (ACB), Acacia wooded grassland of the Rift valley (ACE), Acacia wooded grassland of western Gambella region (WGG), Combretum-Terminalia woodland and wooded grassland (CTw), Dry evergreen Afro-Montane Forest and Grassland complex (DAF), Moist Evergreen Afro-Montane Forest (MAF), Transitional Rain Forest (TRF), Ericaceous Belt (EE), Afro-Alpine vegetation (AA), Fresh water lakes- open water vegetation (FLV/OW), Freshwater marshes and swamps, flood plains and Lake shore Vegetation (SLV/SS), Salt Lake open water vegetation (SEv/OW), Salt Pans, alkaline brackish mud flats and Salt-affected Vegetation (SLV/SS).

**Figure 3.4: Vegetation Regions Correlated to Altitude and Mean Annual Rainfall –**

The image shows a cross-section diagram correlating vegetation types with altitude and precipitation. The x-axis shows precipitation from 500mm to 2000mm, and the y-axis shows altitude from 0 to 4000 meters. Vegetation zones are mapped showing: Afro-alpine Region at 4000m+, Sub Afro-alpine Region, Arundinaria Forest, Rain Forest, Juniperus Forest, Acacia woodland, Mixed Baphia Forest, and Deciduous woodland at lower elevations.

#### A. Afroalpine and Sub-Afroalpine

This type of vegetation is often known as high mountain vegetation. It is very much similar to the European Alpine vegetation. The Afroalpine type of vegetation is found at very high altitudes (above 3300 m.a.m.s.l.). Sub-afroalpine vegetation is found between 3000–3300 m.a.m.s.l., while Afroalpine vegetation is found at higher altitudes than these. In Ethiopia, Afroalpine and sub-Afroalpine vegetation are found in the Highlands of Semein and the Highlands of Bale.

Afro-Alpine vegetation consists of tussock grasslands, serules, scattered mosses and lichens. Sub-Afro Alpines vegetation is dominated by woodland scrubs. Gibra (Lobelia rhynchopetalum) and Asta (Erica arborea) are dominant plant species in this region of natural vegetation.

#### B. Forests

In Ethiopia, forests are found in areas where the altitude ranges from 450–3300 m.a.m.s.l. and where the total annual rainfall is between 200–2200 mm (see Fig. 3.3). This wide variation in altitude and rainfall results in the formation of highland and lowland forests. These two types of forests have very different characteristics since they are the results of altitudinal zonation.

**i. Highland Forests** (forests that grow between 1500-3300m a.m.s.l. altitude). They consist of:

Þ Kerkha (Arundinarial) at an altitude of 2800–3000 m.a.m.s.l.
Þ Tid (Juniperous Procera) or Coniferous trees at an altitude of 2200–2800 m.a.m.s.l.
Þ Zigba (Podocarpus) at an altitude of 1800–2200 m.a.m.s.l.
Þ Woira (Oliia Africana) and Kosso (Hagenia Abbyssinia) at an altitude of (1500–1800) m.a.m.s.l.

**ii. Lowland Forests** (forests that grow below 1500m a.m.s.l. altitude)

These forests are known as gallery/riverine forests. In Ethiopia, they grow along the banks of the Awash, Wabe Shebelle, and Genale Rivers etc. where moisture is available in the soil. The predominant trees are Sholla and Warka. In areas where mean annual rainfall exceeds 500mm, Baphia forest occurs.

#### C. Savanna Woodland

Do you expect certain similarities between woodland Savanna and proper Savanna?

Like forests, Savanna woodlands are found in both highland and lowland areas (250-2300 m.a.m.s.l.) with significant annual rainfall variation of (200-1400 mm). The woodland savannas are grass mixed with scattered trees, shrubs and bush lands. In different areas, they consist of:

Þ Juniperious woodlands – mountain grasslands with Tid trees
Þ Accacia woodlands – grasslands with Ghirar trees
Þ Mixed deciduous woodlands – grasslands with trees like Sholla and Warka

Savanna grasslands experience marked seasons and are characterized by scattered acacia trees. They are mainly dominant at lower elevations and drier climates than the forests.

In areas where mean annual rainfall is more than 1000mm, these grasslands can form attractive park-like areas with acacia, wild fig, sycamore and kosso trees. Ethiopia's savanna grasslands are found in the southern half of Ziway, Langano, Abiyatta and Hawassa.

#### D. Semi-desert and Desert Vegetation

**Figure 3.8: View of Desert Vegetation in Northwest of Asaita –**

The image shows sparse, drought-resistant vegetation in a dry landscape with short acacia trees, thorn bushes, and scattered succulents against a barren background.

In these regions xerophytic (i.e. drought-resisting plants) are the dominant vegetation. These are short acacia, thorn bushes, succulent plants and a few rough grasses. In Ethiopia, vegetation of this kind is found in the Eastern (Afar lowlands), Northwestern and Southeastern Lowlands (Ogaden lowlands), i.e., in areas where annual rainfall is below 600mm and drought persists for a long period of time.

### Activity

Answer the following:

1. With your teacher, schedule an educational trip to nearby natural areas.
2. Draw a sketch map of the target area.
3. Write a short report describing the area's predominant vegetation and discuss with your classmates.

### 3.6.2 Main Kinds of WildLife of Ethiopia

Owing to Ethiopia's great environmental diversity in relief, climate and natural vegetation, the country is believed to be very rich in all kinds of wildlife.

Ethiopia has about 277 species of mammals and 862 species of birds, 201 reptile species and 63 amphibian species. Of these, 7 species of mammals and 25 species of birds are endemic to Ethiopia. These wild animals are found in many parts of the country, but they are largely concentrated in the south and western parts.

The wild animals of Ethiopia can be grouped into the following six broad categories:

1. **Common wild animals:** These animals are commonly found in many places of Ethiopia. For example hyenas, jackal etc.

2. **Game animals:** Most of them inhabit the grasslands found in the lowlands. Ethiopia's game animals include herbivores and carnivores. Some examples of Ethiopia's game animals are:
   - Herbivores include browsers such as giraffes and grazers like wild asses, zebras, etc.
   - Carnivores include lions, leopards, cheetahs etc.

3. **Arboreals (Tree animals):** These animals are animals that climb up trees. Ethiopia's arboreal animals, such as the colobus monkey, apes, baboons, etc. are mostly found in the rainforest regions of Ethiopia.

4. **Aquatic animals:** These creatures are animals that live in lakes and rivers, for example, hippopotamus, fish and crocodiles.

5. **Birds:** Ethiopia has different kinds of both endemic and migratory birds; for example, fish eagles, pelicans, geese, Abyssinian Ground Horn bill and flamingoes. Most of them are found in the rift valley sanctuaries and forest areas.

6. **Endemic animals:** These are wild animals found only in Ethiopia. These days Ethiopia's endemic animals exist in only very small numbers. They inhabit highland and other areas. They are also at great risk of extinction. The following are some of them:

   Þ Walia Ibex (wild goat), found in the Semein highlands.
   Þ Mountain Nyala (Dega Agazon), found in the Bale Mountains.
   Þ 'Gelada' or 'Chilada' baboon, found in the Semein highlands.
   Þ Menilik's Bushbuk ('Dikula') in the Shewan and Bale highlands.
   Þ Swayne's Hartebeest ('Korkay'), found in the Nechsar park and the Sankalle sanctuary.
   Þ Semein Fox ('Key Kebero'), found in the Bale and Semein Highlands.
   Þ Wild Ass ('Yedur Ahiya'), found in the Afar and Southeast lowlands.

These rare animals, especially the Walia Ibex and Semien Fox, are approaching extinction.

### Activity

Answer the following:

1. Do you think that wild animals have significance to the national economy? If so, can you mention some?
2. Can you identify or state some of the common and endemic wild animals found in Ethiopia? Which type is prevalent in your wereda or zone?

---

## UNIT SUMMARY

🌍 Because of its diverse physical environment, Ethiopia has a wide variety of natural vegetation, water, wildlife and soil resources. The altitude plays a significant role in determining the climate, natural vegetation, drainage systems as soil resources.

🌍 The drainage system of Ethiopia is the altitudinal effects, rivers as flow out from the central highlands to the peripheral lowlands. This has made the rivers flow swiftly. Many bigger rivers drain towards neighboring countries. Because of this and the fact that Ethiopia possesses many rivers and lakes, it is known as the "Water Tower of East Africa."

🌍 Ethiopia has different types of soils. They are basically derived from volcanic, metamorphic and sedimentary rocks. The major types of soil in Ethiopia are nithosols, vertisols, acrisols, cambisols, regosols, xerosols, yermisols, luvisols, fluvisols and lithosols. The volcanic soil, especially nithosol, is the most widely utilized soil. The country's cereals, coffee, inset, etc. are grown on this soil.

🌍 In Ethiopia, the types of the natural vegetation of an area are highly correlated with altitude and rainfall. They are classified into five major types namely, Afroalpine and sub-Afro alpine, forest, woodland savanna and semi-desert and desert vegetation. Ethiopia is a home of different wild animals of which some are endemic. These endemic animals are at the risk of extinction.

---

## REVIEW EXERCISES

### PART I: MATCHING ITEMS

**Direction:** Match the Items Under Column "A" with the Items Under Column "B"

| A | B |
| --- | --- |
| 1. Vertisols | A. Comprises the Genalle & the Wabishebelle rivers |
| 2. Non-metallic mineral | B. Platinum |
| 3. The Southern drainage system | C. Comprises the Awash & the Omo-Ghibe rivers |
| 4. Xerosols | D. Characterized by high clay content and sufficient nutrients |
| 5. Metallic mineral | E. Potash |
| 6. The Inland drainage system | F. Characterized by high salt content and humus deficiencies |

**Answers:**
1. D
2. E
3. A
4. F
5. B
6. C

### PART II: MULTIPLE CHOICE ITEMS

**Direction:** Choose the correct word or phrase from the given alternatives.

7. Which of the following is an example of non-renewable resources?
   - A. Coal
   - B. Wind
   - C. Water
   - D. Plant

8. The deepest lake in Ethiopia is
   - A. Lake Tana.
   - B. Lake Langano.
   - C. Lake Hashenge.
   - D. Lake Shalla.

9. Which of the following provides the best example of a decomposer?
   - A. Dead animals
   - B. Fungi
   - C. Dead plants
   - D. Grass plants

10. Which of the following is an example of a biotic component of environment?
    - A. Water
    - B. Wind
    - C. Plants
    - D. Temperature

**Answers:** 7. A, 8. D, 9. B, 10. C

### PART III: COMPLETION ITEMS

**Directions:** Complete each of the following sentences with the correct word or phrase.

11. Fertile soils which develop in seasonally flooded river valleys (plains) of Ethiopia's major rivers are _________________________________.

12. Based on altitudinal zonation, we can classify the forests of Ethiopia into __________________ and ________________________.

13. __________________ and ___________________ are common wild animals that are found in many parts of Ethiopia.

14. _________________ are young and shallow soils found in arid and semi-arid regions of Ethiopia.

15. The western drainage system that is made up of ______________, ______________ and ________________ river basins.

16. The lakes of Ethiopia are classified into _______________ and __________________.

17. __________________ are animals that live in lakes and rivers.

### PART III: SHORT ANSWER ITEMS

**Direction:** Give a short answer for the following.

18. Discuss the relationship between altitude, soils, vegetation and wild animals.

19. Identify the dominant factors that determine the drainage systems in Ethiopia.

20. Which soil classes in Ethiopia are very productive? What are the reasons for this productivity?

21. Which type of vegetation is often known as high mountain vegetation?

22. Name five endemic wild animals of Ethiopia.

23. Explain the difference between carnivores and herbivores and their characteristics.

---

*End of Unit Three*